Okay, maybe a bit on the second question you ask
about what's one of the new offshore claims doing
to research. Well, first of all, it's especially
delicate in the United States because we find oil
on some of our own coastlines, and the U.S.
Geological Survey is now starting to work heavily
on our own coastlines. And so you don't find as much
opportunity to work there on our own coast as we did
before. And the foreign coasts are more and more
closed to us. So this is, in some sense, pushing us
into deep water. But it needn't be all bleak. We can
get some work done with the geological survey, and
we can get some work done with other countries. I
think it just means we have to have more
cooperative programs, is what it turns out. And we
have to cultivate our contacts very carefully,
especially in other countries, if we want to work
off their coast. And we sure include them in plans.
But that's a natural evolution of things in many
respects. For a while, the United States had a very
strong and unique position in oceanography. And
now these other countries are developing their
own capabilities, and they would like to be
included in plans. It's quite understandable. So
I don't look upon it as quite such a bleak thing as
some people do. I think people can do research
together. It's almost a tradition in National
Archive anyway to work with people in other
countries. I don't see that being any catastrophe
that's going to rush on us.
So I don't really worry too much about that, I
guess.
We're continually traveling and continually
meeting people and working with them. And we have
very little political problems with our own
scientific level. The people that we worry about
most are some of the developing countries who
don't understand what we're doing and are
naturally very suspicious. And we feel that
that's unfortunate, that they wouldn't be
suspicious if they knew us. But that will be able to
come in time, I suppose. Well, I'm sure they
confuse oceanographic vessels with the regular
sort of spy vessel that comes close to their shore.
Well, they do that. But there's another concern
that they have that is quite understandable, that
even if you're not a spy vessel, if you're just a
scientific vessel and not one of their own, some
other country will have the scientific data.
Mm-hmm. And whether those scientists are mean to
or not, very likely that data will be spread out to
people of their own country for commercial
exploitation quicker than it would be for their
own people. So these kinds of concerns, just the
very fact that you're gathering the data and not
that you're really trying to have any clearly
subversive means, that in itself appears to be a
threat to some of the countries in that. So it's a
very delicate thing about how you work off the
shores. We have had some problems in some
countries, but we're not panicking yet.
Excuse me. Your relationship with other
scientists. Which countries seem to produce the
best oceanographers?
Oceanography now, you know, is many things to many
people. And as far as marine geophysics goes,
Britain has had a very good reputation. And the
United States has done fairly well. Canada now is
doing quite well, and Japan is coming along very
well.
Those countries are coming along probably faster
than the Soviet Union. Some countries are just
getting into it, but getting into it fast.
Germany, West Germany, and France. For many
years, France had almost no marine physics
program. And over the last few years, they've
tried very hard to improve that situation.
But you know, regardless of how you interpret the
word oceanography, some countries have no
oceanographic capability at all.
Many in South America are trying very hard to
develop oceanographic sentence. But it's a very
difficult thing when they've got severe internal
problems. It seems quite a luxury to them to go off
and be studying things under the water, unless
it's biological. The biological side is a very
practical benefit from the fisheries work. So
they frequently can see that as a first effort in
marine science. We've had contact, as I think many
institutions in the United States have, with a lot
of the Latin American and South American
countries, and this is very important to them, as
well as other places in the Middle East and here and
there. Fisheries is a big thing. But we've had
contact with almost every country of any size in
the world, and it's kind of pleasant working with
them. When did you make your first voyage? Oh, my.
First voyage, that was... The first voyage of any
consequence for scientific research was made in
about 1960, I guess, on the Vima. It was Vima cruise
number 17, I think it was, off of the west coast of
South America. Because I had been in the Navy
before that, so I had... Yeah, been to sea before.
It's a little frightening to think back when you
first went to sea and realize it's been over 30
years since you've been to sea. But I think there
have been something like a dozen and a half cruises
I've been on, more or less, one kind or another. And
almost every part of the world, except the... high
northern southern latitudes. I've had research
programs there, but I haven't been on cruises
there. I've had research programs in the Arctic on
the ice islands. I've had Antarctic on the ice of
Antarctica. I've been to every part of the world,
so it's been quite interesting. Do you think
oceanographers should go to sea? Yes, I do. I feel
rather strongly about that.
Maybe if you're a physical oceanographer and a
theoretical type person, where you are just doing
mathematical calculations,
then maybe it's not so important. But if you're
dealing with data acquired at sea, I think it's
really very important that you get to sea so that
you understand how that data is acquired.
Especially in marine geophysics and marine
geology, I think you really add a great deal of
perspective by going to sea. It's one of the few
professions that you can get in and you do
everything from manhandling gear and working
with your muscles to working with your brain. And
you have to do a whole range of things and that makes
for kind of an interesting job, I think. Many
people like that challenge. You have to battle
yourself against the elements when you go to sea.
And there's a lot of
People have an interest in doing that now. I think
there are many stories about young people who
found themselves at sea. They didn't quite know
what to do on land, but when they get to sea and have
to face a real challenge, a physical challenge,
then they find something very satisfying in that.
So you find a very interesting bunch of people, I
think, in oceanography. It only seemed that way to
me. Well, there's been some complaint, as a matter
of fact, that younger oceanographers don't go to
sea often enough. That's right. Don't get their
feet wet is the word, I think, that one of your older
colleagues used. Yeah, that's right. I would
agree with that. It's really rather important. As
a matter of fact, for students who are planning to
study oceanography, I think it's very important
that they go to sea before they decide to take up
oceanography as a profession, to see if they like
the ocean, because... There's a general tendency
either to like it very much or dislike it very much.
And lots of people just hate the water. They just
think it's a physically disturbing environment
to be in, and it's a risky environment, and it's
disturbing to family life, et cetera, et cetera.
And you just shouldn't be there. Others look upon
it as a real challenge, and it's meant for only a few
people. They're proud to be one of those few. So we
try to encourage students to go on a cruise
We don't know what they're getting in for.
But I'm sure that's going to change in the future.
I'm sure we're going to have lots of
oceanographers that don't go out and face the
elements like these. Well, now, you anticipate
the next question. With the advent of such things
as modeling becoming more and more important in
oceanography, it looks to me like a number of those
people will drop. And consequently, many older
oceanographers are chronologically older
oceanographers. I mean, I don't mean so much in
age, but those who came through the older
institutions or opposed to... Well, basically
what's happening is people are specializing, you
see. And their little piece of the action doesn't
necessarily mean that they go to sea. They can
design an instrument, for example, and have
somebody else test it in sea. Or even if they go to
sea, they don't have to repair all the
instruments. You have electronic specialists
for this and for that and for that, and you have
computer specialists now who go to sea. At this
institution, they go to sea quite regularly. We
have computers go to sea all the time,
general-purpose computers that do
general-purpose plotting and amalgamating
data and massaging data and whatnot and whatnot.
And it used to be that one individual had to do all
those things, besides tell the captain of the ship
which way to go and look out for the weather and
dodge the hurricanes and so on and so on. You don't
have to do that very much anymore. It's the other
people who do that. Navigation is getting much
easier. Some of the electronics is getting quite
sophisticated, too, so it's just not possible for
a person to know the whole range of things. Now, it
requires some pretty good electronics engineers
to handle some of the equipment we have. We have
real-time, multi-channel seismic processing
going on on ships at sea, for example. It requires
fairly good knowledge of computer processing and
other instruments. And we have them all recorded
digitally now. It's all digital recording. on mag
tape, and that's happened in the last ten years or
so, or less even, I guess. Before it was all
recording it by simple machine and pins and
whatnot. It's all changed now.
But I don't think the field of oceanography is
going to collapse, nor will it grow very fast. I
think it will probably have a slow and orderly
growth. I think the interest in it has grown faster
than the field itself could be expected to grow.
And to that extent, I blame the educational
institutions in not having a better feel for how
many new people the business needs. This happens
all across our society, but we ought to have, with
this day and time, we should have a better
understanding of how many people we should train.
Okay, well, let me pose this question for you,
then. It's almost as if, from an outsider, uh,
point of view, it's almost as if the NSF, uh, well,
that'd be too strong, but at least those people
associated with O&R who move into various
National Science Foundation projects, in, let's
say, the mid-50s, it's almost as if they went out to
establish, uh, departments and academic
institutions scattered across the country, to
name a few for you. Fleming goes to Washington, for
example, to establish one. Burt goes down to
Oregon State not too many years later. There's one
established at Texas A&M for Gulf Coast
oceanography. There's one established in Miami
when Walton Smith goes down to Miami. And I'm sure I
could list others if I could think about it, but
those come to mind. Each one of those seem to be as if
it's almost deliberate. Do you think that,
through hindsight, that was a mistake on the part
of grant-giving institutions? That was clearly a
response to political pressure that that
happened. And there's nothing wrong in that. I
think if you...
If you jeopardize national goals by spreading
your meager resources out too thin, then it's
unforgivable. But sure, I think all these places
ought to have the opportunity to learn something
about oceanography. But we have to be careful
about, number one, the funds that are available,
and number two, how many students we turn out. We
can't just expect the Congress of the United
States to appropriate funds at the whim of the
American young people who choose to find it very
interesting this year to go into, because of the
film Jaws or something, they decide to go into
oceanography. And it's not logical, I think, that
the American taxpayer is supposed to support that
kind of interest which may be passing, especially
if these people, once they've graduated, expect
to work in oceanography, and there are no jobs. So
it's interesting. If it's done as an
entertainment, that's one thing. But I don't
know. I think there are a number of us that got into
the business simply because we couldn't hardly
have done anything else. I mean, we just were kind
of addicted by it. If they cut our pay in half, that
wouldn't make any difference about whether we
were at work or not. We were still at work. But there
are a few people, I think, who have a certain degree
of dedication, and others that approach it as a
curiosity or as an amusement. And I don't think you
should expect American taxpayer to support all
these people. So I think physics is the same way
right now. There hasn't been a good understanding
between the educational institutions that
haven't really understood how many people they
should produce. They've never put, of course, any
limit on how many people in a profession want to get
trained in one profession. But I really think that
they do have some obligation point out to students
that if you enter as a freshman this year and intend
to go through this particular course, that you
will very likely have an extremely hard time when
you get out. And that would tend, I think, to shut
the students down paths that would be more helpful
to them and to society. And you don't see much of
that anymore, I guess. And that happens. I know
there's some schools, so I won't mention any
names, that turn out just any number of people in
oceanography, and many of them have no jobs that
they can go to, or no job that they're really proud
of. Well, I think that's a mistake. I think it's
careless. That's like having children without
thinking what you're doing. It's having
graduates without thinking what you're doing.
It's just as careless. So that happens a lot in the
United States, I'm afraid. Not only in the United
States. Right now it's happening in Britain, I
think. Marine research opportunities are
extremely limited in Britain right now, and funds
are very short, but yet they're turning out a large
number of students. Good students, much, but they
have to leave Britain. They just can't work in
Britain. We see a lot coming to this country. We see
a lot coming to Canada. Well, countries this day
and time ought to be able to control that situation
better and still keep people happy in their
professions. Because right now, we're keeping
them unhappy, I think, in that profession, these
young people. So anyway, that's it. OK. Now, I want
to, if I may, drop backwards in the interview
again, OK? Sure. I wanted to pursue those
questions while they were available. At Lamont,
OK, what do you do when you leave Lamont? What does
who do? You do. What did I do? Where did you go? I was
director of a laboratory called the Hudson
Laboratories. at Columbia University. It was in
Dobbs Fair, New York, across the river from
Lamont. It makes kind of an interesting story, I
think. I'm not sure, going to all the details here,
but that was a laboratory that was established
after the Second World War to do acoustics
research for the Navy. The Navy had no academic
laboratory like that, at least not on the East
Coast at that time. And they wanted an academic
laboratory, and so they established this through
the physics department at Columbia. And through
the years, they had become terribly caught up in
classified research. They had become more and
more of a classified laboratory. And they decided
in 1967, I'm shortening this quite a bit, to make it
a laboratory that was not doing so much classified
research, so it could be integrated into the
university. And they asked me if I'd come over and
help them do that. There was new facilities and so
forth. Well, this was just at the time of student
unrest in Columbia. And Columbia was one of the
first schools that really blew up in those days.
And the students were not about to wait for any kind
of orderly change. They went into the president's
office and pulled out the classified documents
and threw them out in the yard and so forth and so on.
And frankly, the Navy got very upset at this and
told the senior administration there that, in
effect, that they couldn't tolerate a situation
like this. Either they would have to get the
laboratory under control quite quickly and
integrate it into the university, or they
couldn't continue the laboratory. The
administration in those days at Columbia
couldn't handle the situation for a number of
reasons, mainly the student problems. The
student pressure was much too great, and it was
almost dangerous to raise your voice against a
student in those days. But the Navy decided to
close the lab, and they decided, after I'd been
there a relatively few months, to close that lab.
and not wait for a change.
My point of view is that the Navy should have given
us more time. And the Navy felt otherwise, and they
closed it. And the lab was closed in 1969, spring of
1969. They had large ships, and we were going at
what I would consider an amazing speed of
diversifying the lab and reducing the
classification problem. But nevertheless, the
Navy didn't see fit to continue that. Well,
shortly after that, the president and other
administrative officials resigned from
Columbia University, but nevertheless, it's
unfortunate, the lab got caught in the squeeze.
The students, of course, had no idea of what damage
they had done, that they put four hundred people
out of work and so forth and so on, and tremendous
personal ramifications throughout the whole
lab, that disruption. But then sometimes
students don't stop to think about those things.
But anyway, it was one of those situations where
the university administration, the student, and
the Defense Department pressures all came to bear
on that lab. So I stayed until the doors were
closed, finally closed. And then I came to Woods
Hole after that. And was your choice to come to
Woods Hole primarily based on the closing of that
lab? Yes. It was. Yes. I felt it would do me good to
get away from Columbia at that time. Well, that
really was what I was implying. It had nothing to do
with... No, no. I was offered a very nice position
back in Lamont, and I thought it was best that I not
stay with them at that time. After all, well, for a
number of reasons, I just felt it was probably best
that I get away from that particular situation.
Since then, it's all quieted down, of course.
Yeah, there are no more students who are doing
these kinds of things. Right. And Woods Hole is a
lovely place to be. It's really quite nice. It's
grown tremendously since I've been here. Right.
Now, so when you decided to come here in 69,
what sort of position did you come in as a senior
researcher? Yes, I was chairman of the Department
of Geology and Physics. And I continued that
position until last year. when I resigned, just
because I knew there were other good people who
could do the job quite adequately. And it was good
for some kind of a change. And we did. We were very
fortunate we got John Ewing here. But I came as
chairman of the Department of Geophysics. And I
think I might have made a few improvements around
here. Well, now you've also anticipated the next
question. Did you have something in mind you
wanted to do with the department when you came?
Yes, I did. The effort at Woods Hole was
fragmented. They had a number of very good people
here, but they were all kind of going in different
directions. And as a matter of fact, this had been
known as a place, and still is in many ways, known as
a place where you have a lot of independent
research groups. And trying to get those people to
aim all their forces in one direction was quite a
challenge.
without trying to destroy anyone's personal
interest or distort their approach to science,
you can find common threads that go through groups
like this and
make kind of more of a spirit de corps in the
department. And I think that's happened. We've
improved the result tremendously. I think it was
fine-tuning, is what you would call it. We put the
right groups next to the right groups. We've got
different types of ships now than we had when I
came. This whole campus where we sit now, 200
acres, we didn't have that in those days. All of the
building program here has come since that time.
The educational program was just getting started
then. Now we have quite a respectable educational
program, plus other programs. So it's been a good
period of development here. In the last seven
years? Yeah. We had a budget, I don't know, it must
have been about five or six million dollars a year,
maybe eight when I came, and now we're at
twenty-two million. So it's grown. It's a big
institution now. And helping it grow has been kind
of fun. And there have been some growing pains, but
it happens in every organization.
When you first go to see, many years ago, and Given
the way vessels operate now, what do you think are
the major technological changes on the vessels
which make oceanographic vessels more
efficient?
Well, everybody has profited greatly by the
navigational procedures. You know, they were
really extremely crude thirty years ago. Getting
a ship across the ocean was just unbelievably
crude. You were never quite sure when you were
going to make a landfall where you were. But today,
you have such precise navigation equipment. You
can go out and you can sail for three weeks outside
of land, and yet you go out and find a bump that's not
much bigger than an automobile on the seafloor,
things of that kind. You can do that now. And you
couldn't do that before. So one of the major things
has been the use of satellites. Satellite
navigation has just made a quantum jump in our
navigational accuracy. But there have been other
things. a whole new electronic technology, the
micro-miniaturization of circuits.
It's just been a great boom. And the knowledge is
improved in all fields. We're working from an
entirely different database than we did in those
days. In those days, everything was new.
Everything you did was new. Now it's not so. Almost
everywhere, you could dive in your submersible
out in the Midlantic Ridge and travel a mile or two,
you'll find a track where somebody's dragged
something across the sea floor, thrown a Coke
bottle. So it's not the wild forest that it was when
it used to be. Now we're understanding it. But
that's familiarity. That's not technology,
really. I think computer technology, the
micrometeorization of electronics, and the
satellite navigation, I can't overstate the
importance of satellite navigation. That's just
been superb. For a reasonable price, you can
locate yourself within a couple hundred feet in
the middle of the ocean, which is quite something.
That's the essential thing. The ships haven't
improved much. I must say that was something I
would have expected that would have improved
more. But they're still the same, basically the
same old things, and you still move at a speed
snail's pace across the ocean.
We were predicting in those days that you'd have
ships that would—fast boats that would shuttle
scientists out to platforms back and forth. That
hasn't happened. We still have the same old chug,
chug, chug, chug, chug that gets us across the
ocean. Hardly more reliable than they were in
those days. Creature comforts are a little
better, not much.
As a matter of fact, I guess losing sails, taking
sails off ship was a thing that many people regret.
So pleasant.
Communications, of course, has greatly
improved, too. The fact that you can talk freely to
your ships and your colleagues who are at sea in any
part of the world just by picking up the telephone
right here and calling a radio show and getting
them on the phone. And you do it quite casually. You
ask them, what's happening today? What about that
experiment you were planning yesterday? How did
it come off today? You can do that. What did you have
for breakfast and so forth? That would be a change
indeed. Yes, it is. Now, in terms of discoveries
which were made during your career,
oceanographic discoveries or others, what
amazed you the most? What took you the most aback,
you the least expected? Well, the simplicity of
sea flow spreading is far and away the most
mind-boggling thing. I think it's hard for a
person who's not in the field to understand why you
should get so shook up about that. I don't know
whether you want to deviate to the personal side.
Maybe you do. Maybe that's one of the advantages of
a thing like this. But I can remember very clearly
several instances that stood out in my mind that
made quite an impression on me. And I've told these
on one or two other occasions. I can't remember
whether they were recent or not. But in the theory
of seafloor spreading, two things were happening
in those days when we were studying seafloor
spreading. One is we were studying about the
motions of the continents across the seafloor.
And not in an idle capacity, but in a very precise,
we could give the year and the position of where it
was. And secondarily, we were learning something
about the Earth's magnetic field, that it
reversed, and when it reversed, and how it
reversed. And these two rather abstract things, I
never thought when I was small that I'd ever get
shook up about some sort of a silly thing like that.
But there was one night in particular when I had
been working on the reconstructing the Earth's
magnetic field history of how it reversed. And I
knew, I was quite certain one night when I went to
bed at 4 o'clock in the morning, having worked on
several computers for a long time, because we had
trial and error methods and we had to use a lot of
computer time to run these things through. I knew
that I was the only person in the world that knew
what had happened to the Earth's magnetic field
for a period of 10 million years. Now, I've always
claimed that geologists who talk about a million
years here, or 500 million years, or 10 million
years, don't really stop and try to appreciate
what quantity of time they're talking about. But
we were dealing in very precise quantities, and we
knew just exactly what was happening on the Earth
at some point 7.256 million years ago. And
whatever creatures lived on the Earth, we weren't
biologists very much. We didn't know much of this
time. We knew the general types of animals. But
those creatures were living in it. We knew an awful
lot about a small segment of their environment.
And we were absolutely sure we were right.